Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane.
Science Fiction author Dean Eing has been putting out some exciting and provocative books in the past few years.
Soft Targets was published as a novel in 1979, then came the very popular Anasazi in 1980,
and Systemic Shock in 1981, and he's got a bunch more on the way.
But Eing actually started publishing science fiction a long time ago. We asked him about his early stories.
My first published story was early in 1955. I wrote it in 1954. It was called Tight Squeeze.
And I know it's in some old compilations of stories back in the 50s. And about a year and a half later,
I think I guess the summer of 1956, I had one published that is called Red Rover.
Now, Red Rover has been reprinted in an anthology about two years ago.
But Tight Squeeze, I believe, has never been reprinted, which is not too surprising as a story.
He doesn't know all that good. As a suggestion of the kinds of problems that a mechanic was liable to have in free fall,
working in an orbital situation, it was, I think, a pretty good story.
Then Eing quit writing science fiction for almost two decades. We asked him why.
I quit writing then for almost 20 years because I had sent another story, which was clearly a fake piece,
clearly a complaint about the way we were centralizing in bigger and bigger cities.
The story I wrote, which I can't even recall the name of now, it was turned down by Horace Gould of Galaxy.
And Horace's scribbled complaint to me was that it was a terrific storytelling but not much of a story.
That I was, it was perfectly clear that I was up on a soapbox haranguing the reader.
And Horace was just entertaining. That's all he was. Well, that made me mad.
I didn't think that my particular position in life was as an entertainer.
And I realized if I couldn't make the things that I had to say interesting enough so that I could entertain and inform at the same time,
then I wouldn't write. And that's the truth. I couldn't. I didn't know the craft that well at the time.
I could either entertain you or I could write some information down.
Eing did a number of things during his time away from science fiction, designing and building race cars as one of them,
where principally he went to work as an aerospace engineer.
After a number of years, though, he grew tired of that type of employment.
It wasn't until some years later that I realized that I had almost nothing to say about what was done with my abilities.
Whatever ingenuity I might have was not going to be used as I chose but as the administration chose.
As long as I worked for some large company.
And so I got more and more out of that, did more and more design work, development of all kinds of notions in my home lab.
Not just building racing cars but developing the fiberglass rivet technique,
developing a multi-manometric gauge gadget that you could put on a prototype automobile
and drive the car at various speeds on a freeway and get wind tunnel data from it.
Things like that. I think we wanted to do it and I never had much opportunity to get anything out of it through the industries that I worked in.
So I decided to head for those guys. I would do all my work on my own.
We'll talk about Deining's fiction next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson.
Deining's Science Fiction is usually set in the near future in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
Anasazi is set in 1996, systemic shock around the same time and soft targets in the early 1980s.
We wondered why he worked in that time frame so often.
I think that the 80s and 90s give me a whole lot more clarity.
It's really tough to see what's going on, to have much of a clear vision as to what's going to happen 30 or 40 years from now.
I have, from the 1950s, I've had some fairly clear notions as to what the future would hold.
And I have a pretty good batting average on that.
Just for one example, to look at my very short and not very important career in sports car racing,
I quit after two or three years and wrote some letters, open letters to editors and so on, of the racing fraternity,
saying that our overuse of gasoline and this waste of energy was really not in the best interest of the human race,
and we were all going to be sorry for it.
This was in 1961 and 62.
And I set about trying to demonstrate how much better machines we could have than we did have.
Well, the cars that I built, one of them is out in my garage right now.
It looks like next year's Porsche and it's 20 years old.
My perceptions of what was going to happen 15, 20, 25 years in the future have been fairly good.
And I would rather write about things that I feel more firmly familiar with.
It's just awfully hard for me to figure out what's going to happen in the year 2010, let's say.
However, I am working on it.
Inge's stories are all built around strong thematic ideas, things like nuclear war, the power of the media and the medical profession.
We asked him how he goes about writing a story.
Does the theme come first, then the character is in plot, or is it the other way around?
It is the theme usually that comes first.
I have on occasion, sometimes just as an exercise, or sometimes just for fun,
or because a friend will ask me to do so.
There is an anthology that Larry Niven did based on his book called The Magic Goes Away.
I don't do much fantasy, but Larry's fantasy was a very clever one, a very good one.
It even had a sense of scientific basis for magic.
He asked me to do a story for a sequel, and I was very happy to do that.
But it's one of the few stories that I've written in which I did not have what I consider an important theme to start with.
So as you first suggest it, yes, I'll usually take a theme, then build plot and characters that go along with it.
Ying's style is extremely fast-paced and exciting.
We asked him if that skill came naturally to him, or if he had to work at it.
I worked my buns off to get it, actually, Garrel.
You've got to remember that I did get my doctorate in communication theory.
And media theory is a fairly good size flood of that.
And studying men like William Stevenson and his play theory of magic communication and so on
taught me a lot about the kind of entertainment that an audience is liable to focus on.
So again, as you said, it's something that I had to work at.
It didn't just come naturally.
Next time we'll talk with Dean Ying about his novella on a Sazi.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane, one of Dean Ying's most popular works as his novella on a Sazi.
The plot concerns a group of aliens who have been stranded on Earth centuries ago
and have taken over their bodies as some Pueblo Indians.
The aliens are long-lived and over the centuries using the bodies of various hosts.
They attempt to build a communication device that will bring more of their kind to Earth.
The time period of the narrative is the 1990s, when the aliens are almost ready to finish their communicator.
They're discovered by an archaeologist, a Pueblo Indian himself,
and they attempt to kill him so that they can remain undiscovered.
We asked Ying to tell us about the impetus behind on a Sazi.
Well, for many years I've been interested in American, North American and Central American archaeology and anthropology.
My master's degree was in American Indian Sign Talks.
I had been in the Anasazi area numerous times and was aware of this mystery that still exists as to why those people moved down to the Anasazi.
In fact, I should be more specific.
The mystery as to why the American Indians who lived near the cliff dwellings,
why they moved down under those cliffs and made those cliff dwellings to begin with.
We know why they left, why they abandoned the cliff dwellings because of a great draught that was starving them out for 25 years or so.
We know about the unbroken tradition of life in that area for centuries and centuries before they built the cliff dwellings.
But we still do not know.
We do not know today why they built those dwellings themselves.
It would seem, well, perhaps they were afraid of something.
They were retreating from something.
Yet we have no significant information as to what they were retreating from.
Well, it was my idea to set up a scenario that would explain why these people abandoned their homes or accessible places up on top of the maces and moved down into a sort of defensive fortification.
Anasazi is an exciting book, an alien horror story really.
Ng doesn't usually write about aliens in his fiction, so he asked him why he did so on Anasazi.
I tried to do just about everything in a very short novel.
It was an exercise in part to see how many kinds of a story I could write without making it seem jumbled.
Even though Anasazi is a real thriller, it's an accurate piece of anthropology in his approach to the Pueblo Indian culture.
In fact, Ng says he had access to some very current research on the Pueblo Indians.
A friend of mine who was doing his doctoral dissertation on witchcraft, which was in Taos, Pueblo.
And I was aware of all this and I had access to his tape recordings.
And while he was setting about the early stages of his doctoral dissertation, I was already reading those tapes, making notes and so on,
so that the book Anasazi, which came out before his dissertation did, had information that was not in the literature yet.
What it amounted to was that I had a tomorrow morning's newspaper and when you have tomorrow morning's newspaper you always seem smarter than you are.
We'll continue our conversation with Ng on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Carson.
Dean Ng's first novel, Soft Targets, was published in 1979.
It's a carefully plotted, very fast narrative about international terrorism and it's set in this decade.
The basic theme of this story concerns the media, particularly television.
Since the events Ng creates for the plot are so real and convincing and since the technology is present day stuff, the novel hardly seems to be science fiction.
We asked Ng if he considers it to be science fiction.
Yes, I do because it's sociological science fiction.
There's engineering science fiction, you know, the hard sciences with hardware.
And there are the, let's say, quasi-sciences, like psychology, sociology, and so on.
Just as sure as 1984 with science fiction, so was Soft Targets.
It involves some scientific hypotheses about media theory.
That was truly the initial impetus for the story, was this theme of what we could do about this uneasy marriage between terrorism and television.
That was a problem I saw in 1971 and I saw no solution for it that would work in a free society until about 76, I guess.
In 1975 or 76, by still mulling the idea over, mulling over the problem, I came across this little set of hypotheses about how you could use the model of warfare, the media going to war against the terrorists.
And see what media do when they go to war.
What have they done in the past?
How easy would it be to do it again?
Would it be effective?
And my conclusions were yes, it would be.
So then I wrote the novel.
Ng takes the television industry to task for helping to foment terrorism by giving it spectacular coverage.
He believes the media should meet its responsibility and actively fight terrorism.
Ng's idea regarding media and terrorism seems to be both logical and acceptable.
Not by the media people.
You know, it's not, they have the most selfish of reasons not to want that to be considered true.
And of course if they can deny it, then they can continue being irresponsible.
Which is of course what they want to do all along.
A number of people in the top of our network media.
I know that they have come across soft targets and they are none too pleased with it.
Soft targets is so vivid and exciting as a narrative that it seems a natural choice for a movie.
Does Ng think it will ever become one?
I think personally the chances of it being made into a movie are perhaps one in a hundred.
For one thing it really lays too much blame. It's very trenchant.
I say too much. I mean for people in the media to be comfortable about it.
It raises hell with the media leaders.
For one thing it's not liable to be the kind of movie that would ever be shown on late night television.
Because it takes television so much to task.
Why would the TV people want to beat themselves about the hidden shoulders by showing a movie that snarls about their irresponsibility?
Chances are they wouldn't.
And when people make movies these days they are very clearly thinking about the TV rights later on.
More with D. Neying on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show.
A production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show. So stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show. A commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David D. Neying.
And D. Neying.
Neying is a fine writer, obviously talented and in command of any idea he pursues.
We asked him why sometimes didn't turn his talents toward fantasy.
I'm not really interested very much in writing about things that I don't believe in.
That is, that I do not believe possible.
You know, I would define fantasy as something that we know to be impossible.
Now of course there are some things that we quote no unquote to be impossible to turn out to be possible after all.
But to the degree that I believe them to be impossible, then I believe making scenarios based on the impossible is one definition of fantasy.
And I have nothing against it for other people to do it.
But there are so many issues, real issues about important things that I think need to be struggled with.
That the reader, the public in general needs to struggle with these issues, with these real things.
So much that I don't really have the time for Never Never Land.
It's here in now land or soon to come land that I worry about a lot.
I have children, I have grandchildren.
I worry about those people. I worry about what's going to happen to them.
I don't want the future to spring on them like some great animal and cut them all up.
I would like us to be ready and armed for the unpleasant parts of the future.
And so I don't feel that I have the time to spend on fantasy.
We asked his opinion on the value of science fiction.
I feel that science fiction is probably the most valuable fiction available to anyone today.
Certainly it's our buffer against future shock if we'll only use it that way.
It's an insulator, a lightning rod if you will.
Science fiction does not have to be, but certainly can be a means of making you ready for the future
before you find yourself suddenly in it.
I was writing about computers and people talk to computers and they're talking back to them 25 years ago.
Now I have a computer at home.
It had not occurred to me 25 years ago that I really would have one at home.
I would have thought that was only for people like Howard Hughes.
But sure enough, just about everybody can have one today if you want one. Badly enough.
Science fiction has that very powerful value.
It can also let you escape. It certainly can be escape literature when you think they need that kind of entertainment.
Inge's concern for the future is seen in many areas besides his science fiction.
He's an inventor, for instance, who offers his ideas freely to the public without seeking patents.
Inge can be categorized as a futurist too, as seen in his latest concern.
And the thing that I'm moving on toward is what some people call the L5 situation or the L5 scenario.
Having to do with habitats, with colonies literally built in space so that we do not have to live all of us on Earth permanently.
I think that the human race's next major frontier is in building habitats out beyond Earth's atmosphere.
That is a very important notion to me and that's where I'm doing a lot of my thinking today.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.